---
title: Being an Extra Introvert
categories: [behavior, psychology, extrovert, introvert]
---

I don't like having to talk to people I don't know. Not sure exactly
why, but I think it's about the risk of being disappointed with the
meeting. There's nothing better than meeting friends and family and
have a good chat, but this seeking out and trembling steps that are
needed when meeting a stranger, is just not something I look forward
to. Or so I keep telling myself.

In practice, I've noticed that I just need something that gets me
going. Something that shows me that people are not as strange and
disappointing as I make them out to be when I'm alone with my
thoughts. Normally, that's done by going to work, and being expected
to engage with just about anyone to get the job done. While working at
Google, I had 100,000 colleagues. Of course, most of my time was spent
talking to the seven people on my team, and perhaps 30 others on
adjacent teams. But those few times when I stuck my neck out, because
I had to talk to someone I'd never talked to before, were scary. It
was fine, though. The vast majority of people I met at Google are
genuinely awesome and understanding. Even when I was having a bad day.

Some of the fear probably stems from the fact that strangers usually
don't spontaneously talk to me unless I've done something they feel is
wrong. I need to be corrected, and they take upon themselves to move
me in line with society again. Good on you. Friends and colleagues, on
the other hand, tend to focus on the positive aspects. Interacting
with them happens when they have some excitement they want to
share. And so we have this bias in emotions attributed to different
sets of people. It's time to learn that there is a third category:
strangers that *I* spontaneously start talking to, not because I'm
angry, but because I'm curious. There's really no reason to expect
they will be disappointing to talk to. And if they turn out to be,
well, how much did I really lose? It's not like I'd seek out to
befriend axe killers on Friday nights anyway.

Talking to people at work has never really been a problem for me, as
long as I have a *reason* to go talk to them. Something I can excuse
my intrusion with. A business case. That makes networking difficult,
and that has in all likelihood stripped me of many opportunities, but
it hasn't really stopped progress in what I was doing. As I move onto
starting my own SaaS company, I need to get over this, or it will
affect not just me, but my future employees. Interacting with
strangers is what you do as a leader, and I want to become a great
leader.

I've noticed the same thing at parties. I really don't want to *go*
there, but when I'm there and gotten started, I'm thrilled being
around people. Alcohol helps, but fact is I'm high just on some social
hormone I don't know the name of. No need for alcohol. It's just the
part of getting started, of getting over my own imagination of what a
stranger will be like, that's in my way. Does that mean I'm actually
an extrovert? I need to be alone sometimes too, but above all, being
alone is *fine*. It's not awesome, most of the time, just okay. What I
really don't like is loud noise, like in night clubs. That doesn't
work for me, but there are many more ways to enjoy the company of
(semi-)strangers that would fit my bill better.

----

Two weeks ago, I had dragged my feet to call the GP for a travel
vaccination. Africa, here we come! The date is closing in, and I
really need to get it done for it to protect me. Because talking to
someone on the phone is the worst way of talking to strangers, this
isn't great. With my Swiss health insurance, I need to first call the
insurance company and state my intents, and then call the GP to book
my appointment. Usually, none of this cause for alarm, but it still
hurts. Being Swedish, and only speaking passable High German, this
adds to the fun.

Last Monday, I bit the bullet. I called the insurance company. A happy
lad answered in English. I stated my case, and he said "go ahead, have
a nice day." That opened me up. My belief in humanity had regained
some strength, and without hesitation, I called the GP's office. After
a bit of a hold, I could book an appointment for the same day! No
issues with the German, and the receptionist even laughed at a small
mistake she was about to make, but caught it herself. Wow, perhaps not
all is lost this week either.

----

I'm still confused where this leaves me. I love acting, making people
laugh and getting the energy going. At the same time, strangers scare
me. Or rather, the worst-case interaction with strangers is scary. The
thing is, the worst-case isn't that common. It's not rational to avoid
all interactions, because the worst thing that can happen isn't
actually that bad, and not that common. For many years, I've thought
that I needed to be alone to recharge my batteries, but perhaps it's
the other way around? Perhaps I'm okay with being alone, but
interacting with people I feel safe with is what really gets me
going. As long as i avoid the loudness of nightclubs... The
pretend-introvert. The extra-introvert. A confused human being.

The most motivating aspect is that if I can start engaging more with
strangers, there will be fewer and fewer people who are
strangers. Less fear is always better.
