---
title: When Naming Matters
category: [postgresql, computers, software engineering, programming]
---

The PostgreSQL database engine has something called `pg_xact`.
It records the status of transactions.
It's a crucial piece of the transaction system, because it says whether a specific transaction was committed or aborted.
It was [added in 2001](https://git.postgresql.org/gitweb/?p=postgresql.git;a=commit;h=2589735da08c4e597accb6eab5ae65b6339ee630), where it was a directory called `pg_clog`.
That directory lives under the `PGDATA` directory, whereas previously, `pg_log` was a system table.

From the commit message, it seems this was done to simplify the code:

> Replace implementation of pg_log as a relation accessed through the buffer manager with 'pg_clog', a specialized access method modeled on pg_xlog.
> This simplifies startup (don't need to play games to open pg_log; among other things, `OverrideTransactionSystem` goes away), should improve performance a little, and opens the door to recycling commit log space by removing no-longer-needed segments of the commit log.

However, 16 years later, the directory was [renamed to `pg_xact`](https://git.postgresql.org/gitweb/?p=postgresql.git;a=commit;h=88e66d193fbaf756b3cc9bf94cad116aacbb355b), because

> Names containing the letters "log" sometimes confuse users into believing that only non-critical data is present.
> It is hoped this renaming will discourage ill-considered removals of transaction status data.

This interesting change can be traced back to a [discussion in 2015](https://www.postgresql.org/message-id/flat/CAASwCXcVGma9KgEu-ESC6u928mW67noZvnawbPUSW7R7AN9UVg%40mail.gmail.com):

> While anyone who is familiar with postgres would never do something as stupid as to delete pg_xlog, according to Google, there appears to be a fair amount of end-users out there having made the irrevocable mistake of deleting the precious directory, a decision made on the assumption that since "it has *log* in the name so it must be unimportant" ([http://stackoverflow.com/questions/12897429/what-does-pg-resetxlog-do-and-how-does-it-work](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/12897429/what-does-pg-resetxlog-do-and-how-does-it-work)).

As long as this was a system table, it was obscure, and touching any table starting with `pg_` probably means trouble.
When that name (well, `pg_clog`) became part of another domain, the file system, users had other expectations.

Sometimes names matter.
